---
title: Number theory
url: 368.html
id: 368
categories:
  - Uncategorized
tags:
---

\[latexpage\] Number theory invokes swaths and swaths of LaTex. Actually, it's rather simple, it's _The study of integers._ A snippet from Die Hard 3 is shown, where exactly 4 gallons of water have to be created from a 3 gallon and 5 gallon jug, which should be very trivial™. begin{tikzpicture} draw (0,5) -- (0,0) -- (4,0) -- (4,5); draw (4,5) -- (4.5,5); draw (0,5) -- (-0.5,5); draw (0,3) -- (4,3); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (2,2) {3 gal.}; draw (6,3) -- (6,0) -- (10,0) -- (10,3); draw (6,3) -- (5.5,3); draw (10,3) -- (10.5,3); end{tikzpicture} begin{tikzpicture} draw (0,5) -- (0,0) -- (4,0) -- (4,5); draw (4,5) -- (4.5,5); draw (0,5) -- (-0.5,5); draw (0,5) -- (4,5); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (2,2) {5 gal.}; draw (6,3) -- (6,0) -- (10,0) -- (10,3); draw (6,3) -- (5.5,3); draw (10,3) -- (10.5,3); draw (6,1) -- (10,1); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (8,0.5) {1 gal.}; end{tikzpicture} begin{tikzpicture} draw (0,5) -- (0,0) -- (4,0) -- (4,5); draw (4,5) -- (4.5,5); draw (0,5) -- (-0.5,5); draw (0,1) -- (4,1); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (2,0.5) {1 gal.}; draw (6,3) -- (6,0) -- (10,0) -- (10,3); draw (6,3) -- (5.5,3); draw (10,3) -- (10.5,3); draw (6,3) -- (10,3); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (8,1) {3 gal.}; end{tikzpicture} begin{tikzpicture} draw (0,5) -- (0,0) -- (4,0) -- (4,5); draw (4,5) -- (4.5,5); draw (0,5) -- (-0.5,5); draw (0,4) -- (4,4); node\[draw,text width=2cm, text centered\] at (2,2) {4 gal.}; end{tikzpicture} This is impossible to achieve with a 6 and 3 gallon jug, because we'll always be dealing with multiples of 3. No amount of pouring in between the jugs will achieve 4. What time is it? It's induction time! But first, let's construct a simple state machine. Suppose a = No. gallons of one jug and b = No. gallons of the other jug, and that a ≤ b. Theorem: if m | a and m | b, then m | (any result attainable from various combinations of pouring back and forth) Using a **state machine**, let us define the individual states as pairs of (x, y), where x and y are the gallons in a.jug and b.jug respectively. Start state: (0, 0) Possible transitions: def empty\_x(x, y): return (0, y) def empty\_y(x, y); return (x, 0) def fillup\_x(x, y); return (a, y) def fillup\_y(x, y); return (y, b) def pour\_x-y(x, y); if ((x+y) > b) return ((x+y)-b, b) else return (0, (x+y)) def pour\_y-x(x, y); if ((y+x) > a) return (a, (y+x)-a) else return ((y+x), 0) Describing our little pouring game in terms of the transitions (around 20:00 Professor van Dijk seems to have taken his own example from his lecture notes...) : Let a = 3 and b = 5 Start state (0, 0) -> fillup\_x (3, 0) -> pour\_x-y (0, 3) -> fillup\_x (3, 3) -> pour\_x-y (1, 5) -> empty\_y (1, 0) -> pour\_x-y (0, 1) -> fillup\_x (3, 1) -> pour x\_y (0, 4). Proof by Induction: Theorem: the Theorem above. Inductive Hypothesis: P(n) = "If (x, y) is the state after n transitions then m | x, m | y." What is the the Invariant, something that holds true for every P(n)? Very conveniently it's our Theorem. Base case: P(0), which means we'll be at the Start state; m | 0 is True. Inductive step: Assume P(n), in order to prove P(n+1). $P(n) Rightarrow m mid x wedge m mid y$